In 180 AD, Hispano-Roman General Maximus Decimus Meridius intends to return home after he leads the Roman army to victory against Germanic tribes near Vindobona on the Limes Germanicus. Emperor Marcus Aurelius tells Maximus that his own son, Commodus, is unfit to rule and that he wishes Maximus to succeed him, as regent, to restore the Roman Republic. Marcus Aurelius informs Commodus of his decision; in response, Commodus murders his father.
Commodus proclaims himself the new emperor and requests loyalty from Maximus, who refuses. Maximus is arrested by the Praetorian Guard and is told that he and his family will die. He kills his captors and, wounded, rides for his home near Turgalium, where he finds his wife and son crucified. Maximus buries them and collapses from his injuries.  Slavers find him and take him to the city of Zucchabar, in the Roman province of Mauretania Caesariensis, where he is sold to gladiator trainer Proximo.
Maximus reluctantly fights in local tournaments, his combat skills helping him win matches and gain popularity. He befriends two other gladiators, Hagen (a German) and Juba (a Numidian). In Rome, Commodus organises 150 days of games to commemorate his father's death. Upon hearing this, Proximo reveals to Maximus that he was once a gladiator who was freed by Marcus Aurelius, and advises him to "win the crowd" to win his freedom.
Proximo takes his gladiators to Rome to fight in the Colosseum. Disguised in a masked helmet, Maximus debuts in the Colosseum as a Carthaginian in a re-enactment of the Battle of Zama. Unexpectedly, he leads his side to victory, and Commodus enters the Colosseum to offer his congratulations. He orders the disguised Maximus, as leader of the gladiators, to reveal his identity; Maximus removes his helmet and declares vengeance. Commodus is compelled by the crowd to let Maximus and the gladiators live. 
Lucilla, Commodus's sister and Maximus's former lover, visits Maximus in his cell and offers her help, but he refuses. Meanwhile, Commodus arranges a duel between Maximus and a legendary, undefeated gladiator, Tigris of Gaul. Several tigers are set upon Maximus during the duel, but he prevails. Commodus orders Maximus to kill Tigris, but Maximus spares his opponent's life. In response, the crowd chants "Maximus the Merciful", which angers Commodus. Increasingly paranoid, Commodus instructs his advisor, Falco, to have every senator followed. 
Maximus discovers from Cicero, his ex-orderly, that his former legions remain loyal. He meets in secret with Lucilla and Gracchus, an influential senator. They agree to help Maximus escape Rome to join his legions, topple Commodus by force, and hand power back to the Roman Senate. The Praetorians arrest Gracchus, and Commodus learns of the plot when Lucilla's son, Lucius, innocently hints at the conspiracy. Commodus threatens Lucilla and Lucius, and has the Praetorians attack the gladiators' barracks. Proximo and his men, including Hagen, sacrifice themselves to enable Maximus to escape. Maximus is captured at the rendezvous with Cicero, where the latter is killed.
To win back public approval, Commodus challenges Maximus to a duel in the Colosseum. He stabs Maximus in the lung before the match to gain an advantage. Despite his injuries, Maximus disarms Commodus during the duel. After the Praetorians refuse to aid him, Commodus unsheathes a hidden knife; Maximus overpowers Commodus and drives the knife into his throat, killing him. Before Maximus succumbs to his wounds, he asks for political reforms, the freedom of his gladiator allies, and the reinstatement of Senator Gracchus. As he dies, Maximus envisions reuniting with his wife and son in the afterlife. His friends and allies honor him as "a soldier of Rome", at Lucilla's behest, and carry his body out of the arena.
That night, Juba visits the Colosseum and buries figurines of Maximus's wife and son at the spot where he died.