Three years after Piggy Island's destruction, Red protects Bird Island from the pigs, led by King Leonard Mudbeard, who are in a prank war against the birds and have rebuilt Piggy Island. One day, a giant ice ball from nearby Eagle Island hits the sea near Piggy Island, forcing the pigs to seek and agree to a permanent truce with the birds. Zeta, the leader of Eagle Island, is angry with her frozen surroundings and wants to occupy the two islands by shooting ice balls from a super-weapon to force their inhabitants to evacuate. Red's two best friends, Chuck and Bomb, surprise and ask Red to join them in a speed dating activity, where Red meets Chuck's sister Silver, an engineering student, who deems Red incompatible. Meanwhile, Zoe - the daughter of Red's classmate Terence and teacher Matilda - loses the eggs containing her unborn sisters while playing with her friends, Vincent and Samantha, so they try to recover the eggs.
Leonard visits and convinces Red to form an alliance, recruiting Chuck, Bomb, Silver, Mighty Eagle, and Leonard's new assistant Courtney. A secret meeting in Mighty Eagle's cave gets disrupted when Zeta's super-weapon hits Eagle Mountain, which alarms the other birds living on Bird Island. As the team, now joined by pig gadgeteer Garry, travels to Eagle Island by submarine, Red assures the other birds that they do not need to evacuate. Once there, Mighty Eagle confesses that Zeta was once his fiancée but he abandoned her due to cowardice before he flies away. Red insists on fighting alone but Silver decides to follow him instead. They intrude the base from the mouth of the weapon and get captured and frozen to inflatable water toys. Zeta tells them her plan to fire ice balls filled with lava at both islands and demonstrates her newly upgraded cannon. Red, regretting not telling the birds to evacuate, admits his wish to be liked by everyone to Silver, who comforts him and frees them both. Meanwhile, the other team members disguise themselves as an eagle and grab a key card to get into the base, reunited with Red and Silver and establishes a plan to destroy the cannon as it begins to load up ammunition in ten minutes for the actual attack on both islands.
Red and Silver put themselves inside an ice ball and roll it down the spiralling ammunition track of Zeta's cannon, with their allies distracting the eagles and working to sever the track by reaching and pulling a switch so that the ball flies off and crushes the cannon. The plan fails and Zeta and her guards confronted them, giving her a chance to fire the weapon. Mighty Eagle arrives and makes a desperate attempt to stop Zeta by apologizing to her for abandoning her. Zeta brushes him off, revealing his real name is Ethan and that her assistant Debbie is their daughter. While Zeta is distracted, Chuck ties up the weapon using Silver's new invention, a very strong string called Super-String, which catches and decelerates the lava balls after Zeta fires them. As the string breaks, the hatchlings, who finally recovered their eggs, along with some piglets who had joined them on their quest back home, pass by Eagle Island and help grasp the string. The lava balls slide back into the cannon, destroying it and the base. Everyone escapes, and Mighty Eagle protects Debbie from being crushed by a metal plate, redeeming himself to her and Zeta.
Mighty Eagle and Zeta get married on Bird Island, with Red as the chief witness and Debbie as the flower girl and the rest of the birds, pigs, and eagles celebrate. Afterwards, Red credits Silver and the entire team for saving the islands, and as a result finds himself even more beloved for his honesty and selflessness and starts a relationship. Meanwhile, the hatchlings discover they have accidentally swapped Zoe's eggs by mistook her eggs, so they give them back to their mother, who has brought the newly born sisters. However, as soon as the older hatchlings take their eyes off them, the sisters stow away onto the boa constrictor's boat, causing the cycle to repeat.